So we had a look at the very basic data structures; numbers, strings, booleans
but Javascript offers us more data structures than these.
Let's have a look at the following;
if I have square brackets and then 1, 2 and 3,
what do you think I'll see in the console if I hit run now? Well I get it printed like this but what is this?
Well let's check it with typeof,
it's an object
but actually, yes it's an object but specifically, it's an array. An array is a collection of values
and
this clearly is a collection of numbers here,
so we have three numbers in this array
and the cool thing about an array is that it allows us to store multiple values in one variable,
as you see here, we have three numbers in one variable.
We also may mix different data types,
so I may add '4' but notice that 4 is in quotation marks,
so 4 actually is a string here.
So if I run this, you see we still get it printed out
but now we have an array of mixed data types which might have its uses in your program too.
Now while it's certainly cool to have such a collection, you most of the time won't need the complete collection
but you want to store several values there but then want to be able to access the different values.
You can easily access values by putting square brackets after your variable name when you are accessing
it
and between the square brackets, you put the index of the value you want to access.
Now here's an important thing and I will come back to arrays in a later stage of this course,
arrays start with an index of zero,
so the first element, one here, has an index of zero.
So if I tried this, accessing the first element as you might think, what do you think I'll see in the console
here? Two,
so we're actually accessing the second element even though I type one here
and the reason of course is that the first index actually is zrro.
So if I hit run now,
now you see we're getting one
and that's just important to keep in mind.
Therefore the last element is not 4,
and if I were to try accessing the 4th index here or index 4 here, what do you think we'll see in
the console?
Well, we're not seeing four but we're getting undefined and undefined is a pretty clear message, we're
accessing a value which is not defined,
we're accessing the last index here
and you can think of this like having an extra comma here,
so now here we have a new element but there is nothing there.
So what do you think shows in a console if I now click run? Still undefined, because now I just made
clear what happened before. We have this extra element but there's nothing here,
so it's undefined.
Now we also get some other types we can use,
this is an array here,
if I get rid of it and I instead try this, undefined, that was what we just got a couple of times, right,
what
do you think I'll see if I now hit run?
Well we still get undefined, so we can set a variable to being undefined
but we should not do this because undefined really is Javascript's error message of telling us 'hey, you
are accessing something which isn't there, which wasn't defined'
and if we want to set a variable to being empty
and there are cases where we want to do this, where we want to reset it, where we want to clear it,
we should not use undefined but instead null which also is a keyword and tells Javascript 'hey this
variable is now not set or it is empty but it is not undefined',
so what do you think I'll see in a console if I now hit run? I get null because now it is set to null
and not to undefined.
Now is null the same as undefined?
Let's check this and I'll use an operator which I'll explain in more depth later on
but basically, I'll compare null to undefined
and I'm printing the result of this comparison.
Now I'm comparing it with two equal signs, which means check if the value is equal
and what do you think I'll see in the console?
I get
true,
so internally Javascript has the same value for null and undefined, which means it's kind of the same
if we only have a look at the value
but if I add another equal sign here,
I not only check for the values being equal but also for the types being equal
and if I now run this code, I get false.
So null is not exactly the same as undefined but value-wise, it's handled in the same way.
So we had undefined and null, we have one other special type. I'm going back to printing out the variable
and
I can also set it to capital n, lowercase a, capital n and that refers to Not A Number. Not A Number
as the name says is well simply just not a number
and what do you think I'll get when I hit run now?
Well I get not a number, but what's the sense of this type?
Well typically you would set a variable equal to Not A Number but you might get not a number as the
result of of some kind of mathematical calculation.
If something goes wrong there or for example, you try to multiply a number with a string, which doesn't
work since you can't multiply these two types,
then you would get Not A Number as the result since the result isn't a number since
Javascript isn't able to get a result,
so it's mostly an error message from mathematical equations or mathematical operations.
Now with null undefined and Not A Number, what is the type of Not A Number,
what do you think we'll see in a console?
It's actually a number, which is pretty confusing since this is called Not A Number,
right?
But as I said, it's the result of a mathematical calculation and therefore technically, it's a number
but it's a special number, a kind of undefined number if you want to put it like this.
So actually, a number which isn't a number
and yes, this is a bit confusing
but basically think of it as an error message from a mathematical calculation.
And whilst we're at it, what is the type of null? What do you think we'll see if I hit run?
It's an object,
and what's the type of undefined?
It's undefined.
So this is why I was getting this error when comparing both with three equal signs
which also checks on type equality. The types of undefined and null are not equal, undefined is of type
undefined and null is of type object. The values are equal
and that's important to understand here.